# Secret Coding Missions for Kids

Mission: Make a website

# Step 1 – Little arrows and magic words.

  
  
:sunglasses: Hey, want to make a website?

:girl: :boy: Is it hard?

It can be, some of it can be hard like a big 1000 piece puzzle\! 

Is there a little puzzle that I can do?

Sure there is\! Coding is made up of lots of little puzzles that go
together to make something big like a website. Do you want to see the
tiniest web coding puzzle?

Okay.

The tiniest coding puzzle in a website looks like this:

\<   \>

What\! Those are just two little arrows\! What do they have to do with a
website?

They're part of a website coding language called HTML or *Hypertext
Markup Language,* but everyone just says HTML because it's easier to
say, and to remember\!

What do the arrows do?

By themselves nothing. It's what you put inside them that counts, for
example lets put the first thing you'll need for a website inside them:

\<\!DOCTYPE html\>

Huh? \!DOCTYPE html, sounds like magic words\! What's it do?

You're going to figure it out yourself\! Step \#1 in your website
mission, your first tiny puzzle:

  - ![](Pictures/100002010000010000000100D38BABCA.png)Open a notepad
    file editor, it looks like this:

  - Type: \<\!DOCTYPE html\>  

  - Save As: myWebsite.html 

  - Find your myWebsite file and open it.

  - What happened? 

*Don't come back until you've tried it yourself\!* Have you tried it?

When I saved it the file turned into a little internet picture... 

And when you opened it? 

The web browser opened but it was empty\! Did I do something wrong?

You did everything right\! When you saved the file as myWebsite.html the
.html told your computer to treat the file as an internet page, and when
you wrote: \<DOCTYPE html\> that told the internet browser that
everything after that tag is html language\! You made a website, it's
just 100% empty\! 

So my website is empty because I don't have any more of that html
language after my tag? So I have a tag like on a present, but my present
is empty? 

I know, no one likes an empty present, or an empty website\! How about
for step 2 we put something inside it?

Can we put a game inside it\! That would be awesome\!

A game is a big puzzle, you've got to learn the little puzzles first
before you can put them together into a big puzzle like a game website,
let's start by writing your name on your site. 

# Step 2 – Your name and all your friends too. 

Are you ready to sign your name on this empty website you've made?

For sure, what do I do? Can I just type my name in after the  
\<\!DOCTYPE html\> tag?

You could give it a try and see if it works. Go ahead, the best way to
answer the question “will it work?” is to try it, don't worry about
breaking it, you can always put it back. 

It worked\! I just typed my name in, saved it and there it was on the
page it's so easy\! 

I have another little puzzle for you. Step \#2 in building your website:

![](Pictures/1000000000000127000001A62A725E1B.jpg)

  - Add your friend's names.

  - One name per line.

  - A space between names

  - Save the file.

  - Open your myWebsite.html file.

  - What happened? 

*Don't come back until you've tried it yourself\!* Have you tried it?

I don't get it, I put all the names on different lines, but on the web
browser all my friends are squished together on the same line.

Yes, that's because you don't have a framework. Like a skeleton holds
you together or those horrible little twisty things hold toys in their
packages; HTML holds a site together.

So I need more html language-tag-stuff to make my site stop squishing
together? 

Exactly\! Are you ready to learn your first real html tag? 

Bring it on\!

Alright you know how you wanted to have each friend on a new line? When
you're writing a story and you stop squishing words together in a row
and start on a new line what do you call it?

A paragraph, every new paragraph gets a new line, but sentences stick
together. So is the new tag \<paragraph\>? 

Think about how long it would take to type \<paragraph\> over and over
again. What would be a shorter way to do it? Think about it for a
minute. 

# Step 3 – Getting your own line and a little bit bolder. 

Have you thought of a shorter way to do a paragraph tag then typing out
the whole word every time?

I know\! I could copy and paste it\! That would make it faster\!

Not a bad idea, but how about shortening it to just one letter. What
letter would you use to represent paragraph?

P\! I'd use 'p' because paragraph starts with p\!

And how would it look inside your little arrows?

Like this \<p\>?

Yes that's right a paragraph tag looks like this:

\<p\>

So I just put one little \<p\> tag in front of each of my friend's
names? 

Close, but you need to tell the computer where the paragraph ends as
well as where it starts. How do you think you would do that?

Like this? \<p\> My Name \<p\> That's a paragraph tag at both ends\!

One little symbol is missing, a slash it looks like this:

/ 

Where is it on the keyboard?

On the same key as the '?' question mark. Can you find it on the
keyboard?

Yes, but where do I put it in the tag?

Right before the 'p' in the closing tag, that's the tag at the end of
the paragraph.

I get it\! \<p\> My Name \</p\> Is that right? 

Yes perfect\!

Yeah\! Can I fix my friends list now?

Go ahead, show me when you're done\!

I did it and it worked\! This is my code and look at my website:

![](Pictures/10000000000002750000016BF5FAA8C6.jpg)![](Pictures/1000000000000129000001A689B1B89F.jpg)

  

That looks great\! What do you think of it?

It's cool what the little \<p\> tag can do\! But, it's my website,
shouldn't my name be bigger or something? 

Sounds about right to me, there's many ways to make one paragraph stand
out more than the others. There's the 'bold' tag, 'strong' tag, and 5
'header' tags. 

So these tags go at both ends of the paragraph I want to change?

Exactly, no matter which tag you use it wraps around just like this:

\<'tag'\>\<p\>Your paragraph.\</p\>\</'tag'\>

I see the slash again\! Do I always need a slash for html tags?

Almost always, whenever you wrap around a piece of content you need to
tell the computer where it finished. 

So I know the paragraph tag looks like \<p\>, so I'm guessing these tags
are: \<bold\>, \<strong\>, \<header\>... wait 5 header tags?

Yes five header tags\! Your guess is close, except bold and header are
shorted to a 'b' and an 'h', so bold:

\<b\>\</b\>

And 5 header tags:

\<h1\> \</h1\>

\<h2\> \</h2\>

\<h3\> \</h3\>

\<h4\> \</h4\>

\<h5\> \</h5\>

Wow\! Wait... Hold on\! What about strong? Was I right?

Yes, you were\! It's: 

\<strong\> \</strong\>

It must be special since it's not shortened\!

It is special\! The \<strong\> tag is meant to tell the computer the
words inside are important, to us it looks the same as bold, but to the
search engine computer it shows what the website page is about. 

So with the 5 header tags... \<h1\>, \<h2\> and so on which is the best?

Depends where you're using it on your site, they're different sizes. 

Which is the biggest? That's the one I want for my name\!

The best way to answer a question like that is to try it out yourself\!
Time for step\# 3\! Are you ready?

Yes\! What should I do?

This puzzle is fun\! Step \#3 in building your website:

![](Pictures/1000000000000168000001C930381750.jpg)

  - Copy your name.

  - Paste it 7 times.

  - Tag the duplicates.

  - Use\<b\>,\<strong\>, and \<h1\>...to...\<h5\>

  - Save the file.

  - Open up the website. 

  - See which tag is the biggest\!

*Don't come back until you've tried it yourself\!* Have you tried it?

I did it\! The biggest was \<h1\>. So I deleted all the others\! 

Makes sense, you don't need your name 7 times at the top of your
website, one will do\! It was fun to see it all kinds of different
sizes, though wasn't it?

Sure, but what if I wanted to *underline* my name and put in *italics? *

*C*an I do all that too?

Sure there's tags for *italics* and *underline*, and you can use both of
them and **bold** and header tags all together\!

Yes\! Lets do this\! Tell me the tags\! 

Slow down, think about it, I bet you could figure it out yourself\! What
are short ways to represent *italic* and *underline* in the same way we
did with \<b\>\</b\> for bold. Think about it for a minute.

# Step 4 – A dotty list of friends and breaking lines

So did you think of how we could represent *italic* and *underline* in
same way as we did with \<b\> \</b\> for bold, or \<p\> \</p\> for
paragraph?

Well, both of the tags are just letters, so we could use letters for
underline and italic? So, 'u' for underline, and 'i' for italic?

Yes that's right, \<u\>\</u\> for underline and \<i\>\</i\> for italic\!

Can I use all the tags at the same time on my name? I want to make it
italic, bold, strong and header1\!

You may be getting carried away, but yes you can 'nest' all those tags
one inside the other, think of it as boxes inside boxes. 

With a present at the centre?

Exactly, in this case your name is the present in the centre. If you
used h1, italic and underline you can build up the tags adding each new
tag on either side of the other tags:

Paragraph:

\<p\>Crystal\</p\>

Add the h1 tags:

\<h1\>\<p\>Crystal\</p\>\</h1\>

Add italic:

\<i\>\<h1\>\<p\>Crystal\</p\>\</h1\>\</i\>

Add the underline:

\<u\>\<i\>\<h1\>\<p\>Crystal\</p\>\</h1\>\</i\>\</u\>

Wow, by the time you did the last one it looks pretty messy\! 

Yes, that's why it helps to think of it as adding a new box around what
was already there, an opening and a closing tag. 

So work from the centre and build out? One minute I'll be right back,
I'm going to fix my name\! 

Oh you're back? How's your name look now?

My name is great, but my friends list could look better. 

I see now that you've snazzed up your name you're looking for more
improvements. I could tell you about an html tag especially for lists.

Yes, please\!

Well, html has 2 tags for lists actually, the 'ordered list' tag and the
'unordered list' tag. 

What, you want me to guess what letters they use for 'ordered list' and
'unordered list,' can't you just tell me the tags?

And spare you the joy of discovery, I think not\! 

Alright fine, so 'ordered list,' hmm, that's two words that start with
'o' and 'l' ... so \<ol\>? 

That's right so the opening and closing tags together would be \<ol\>
\</ol\>\!

Right\! With the slash in the closing tag\! And 'unordered list,' also 2
words... starts with 'u' and 'l' so \<ul\> \</ul\> and I remembered the
closing tag, yay me\!

That's great, there's just one thing I left out... Each item in the list
needs a tag too, a 'list item' tag. 

So a list item tag... I'm on to you... that tag would be the two first
letters of 'list item\!' Like this: \<li\> \</li\> ?

Exactly like that\! Would you like to see what a three item grocery list
would look like with the 'ordered list' and 'unordered list' tags?

I want to see what my friends list looks like with them\! 

You could skip ahead if you think you know how to put the tags on...

Maybe I better see this grocery list first. 

Okay, here's a list of eggs, bread and cookies in html:

An ordered list:

\<ol\>

\<li\>\<p\> eggs \</p\>\</li\>

\<li\>\<p\> bread \</p\>\</li\>

\<li\>\<p\> cookies \</p\>\</li\>

\</ol\>

An unordered list:

\<ul\>

\<li\>\<p\> eggs \</p\>\</li\>

\<li\>\<p\> bread \</p\>\</li\>

\<li\>\<p\> cookies \</p\>\</li\>

\</ul\>

That doesn't look too bad, the only difference between the two is one
letter 'o' for ordered and 'u' for unordered\! 

Do you notice anything else different about the tags for lists?

The list item tags are further in on the page than the \<ol\> or \<ul\>
tags?

Exactly, that little detail is just for looks, to make your code easier
to read we can add 4 spaces (or just hit the 'tab' button) with each
nested html tag... the computer could read it even if we wrote it like
this:

\<ul\>\<li\>\<p\>eggs\</p\>\</li\>\<li\>\<p\>bread\</p\>\</li\>\<li\>\<p\>cookies\</p\>\</li\>\</ul\>\<ul\>\<li\>\<p\>eggs\</p\>\</li\>\<li\>\<p\>bread\</p\>\</li\>\<li\>\<p\>cookies\</p\>\</li\>\</ul\>

That doesn't look as nice. Will it still look the same on my website?

Yes, the computer will print it just the same, but we like to be able to
read it too, so we format it so it's easier for us to read. 

OK, is it time to do my list now?

Certainly, I have a new puzzle for you\! Step \#4 in building your
website:

  - Add 'unordered list' \<ul\>\</ul\> tags to your friends list.

  - Don't forget the 'list item' tags\!

  - Make a family list. 

  - Put your family in order from oldest to youngest. 

  - Add 'ordered list' \<ol\>\</ol\> tags to your family list. 

  - Add titles for your friends and family lists with 'h2' tags.

  - Save the file.

  - Look and see how ordered lists and unordered lists are different\!

![](Pictures/10000000000001E30000027119D18D18.jpg)

*Don't come back until you've tried it yourself\!* Have you tried it?

Well, I tried it. 

You don't sound impressed, is something not quite right? Your friends
list should have dots in front of the names and the family list should
have numbers, what do you have? 

Some of my dots aren't in front of my names, and I don't have any
numbers\!

Sounds like you're missing the ordered list tag. Why don't you check to
make you have all your tags is the right place and didn't forget any. 

You were right I was missing a tag\! I fixed it and now it looks great\!

You don't have to wait for something to not work to see all the strange
effects mistakes can make. Go ahead and delete stuff, save and look at
your site to see what changes. You can always put it back. Today is
about learning, not about doing everything perfect the first time. 

Thanks that makes me feel better\! Now how about some pictures\! All the
best sites have great pictures\!

You're right\! Images really make a website pop\! But before we do that
I think this is a good time to go back and review what you learned, to
make some notes for yourself about each of the tags and what they do.
Make your very own Coding cheat sheet\! 

# Step 5 – Adding awesome images\! 

So did you make a cheat sheet for yourself of all the tags you learned
so far?

Sure, here are all the tags I learned so far:

  - \<\!DOCTYPE html\> --\> Goes at top of page

  - \<p\>\</p\> --\> Paragraph 

  - \<b\>\</b\> --\> Bold 

  - \<i\>\</i\> --\> Italic 

  - \<u\>\</u\> --\> Underline

  - \<strong\>\</strong\> --\> For important stuff

  - \<h1\>\</h1\> --\> Header tags 1-5, h1 is biggest\!

  - \<ul\>\</ul\> or \<ol\>\</ol\> --\> lists unordered or ordered

  - \<li\>\</li\> --\> list items 

That looks great, you've learned a lot already\! 

Pictures, please?

Alright, so if you were the inventor of html, what would the image tag
look like?

Well it can't be \<i\>\</i\> because that's italics... how about
\<image\>\</image\>? 

Close, but the actual inventor chose to write the tag like this: \<img\>

So they left out some vowels, who was the inventor of html anyways?

Tim Berners-Lee was the man behind html and more importantly the World
Wide Web or as it's know now the internet\!

Wow\! I've never heard of him\! 

If you'd like to know more about him head over to google and type his
name in.

Okay, be right back... 

....Did you know he was knighted\!

Yes, I did. So as I was saying; Sir Berners-Lee invented html and chose
to use \<img\> as the image tag. 

Wait, where's the closing tag?

There is no closing tag, because the \<img\> tag has no content, just
attributes. 

Contents? Attributes? I'm confused\! What do those words mean?

Think of our html tags as gifts, a wrapped present has both contents and
attributes... stuff inside it (contents) and information about it
(attributes), like who the gift is from. 

Okay, then what are the attributes of an \<img\> tag?

Well, you need to tell the computer where to find the picture you want
to show, that's one attribute, it's called the source, shortened to src.

So if it's an attribute of the \<img\> tag does it go on the image tag
like a tag on a present? 

Yes, just like this: \<img src=”my\_picture.jpg”\>

How does that tell the computer where to find my picture... it's just
the file name of my picture. 

The computer assumes that your picture is in the same folder as your
html file, if it's somewhere else you need to write it a bit different. 

What if my picture is in my mom's vacation folder? 

Well then you would need to add the path, like this:

\<img
src=”C:\\Users\\mom\\Documents\\Pictures\\vacation\_pictures\\my\_picture.jpg”\>

Wow\! That's a long path to my picture, isn't there an easier way? 

There is, it's standard practice to have a sub-folder called images in
your website folder, you would put all your images in one folder and
access it this way:

\<img src=”images/my\_picture.jpg”\>

That's better, so what if I want to use a picture on my mom's facebook
page? A picture from the internet?

That is a common way of getting pictures and it's easy to do:

\<img src=”https://facebook.com/your\_moms\_photo.url”\>

That's not a real facebook website address, is it? 

Nope, it's just a pretend example, but you can right click on your mom's
picture and click “copy image address” and that will get you the exact
address you need for your source attribute.

Okay so src is one attribute, but you said attributes, what else do I
need?

Well you could get away with just the source attribute, but it is good
practice to have an alternate bit of text to show if the picture won't
load because of an incorrect or broken path. 

Okay, I bet it's shortened somehow that seems to be a trend... so would
it be alt for alternate? 

Exactly just like this: alt = “This is my picture” so the complete tag
with src and alt would look like this:

\<img src=”images/my\_picture.jpg” alt=”This is my picture”\>

I'm ready for the next challenge\! Let's put some pictures on my
website\!

Certainly, time for some pictures\! Step \#5 in building your website:

  - Make sure your html file is in it's own folder.

  - Name that folder your-nameWebsite

  - Add an images folder inside your website folder.

  - Put a couple images in your image folder.

  - Make file names lowercase, - and \_ are okay too\!

  - Add at least one picture to your html file.

  - Remember to use the \<img\> tag

  - Use the source attribute src to tell the computer where to find your
    picture.

  - Use the alt attribute to include an alternate description of your
    picture.

  - For bonus points add a picture from the web, maybe from your mom's
    Facebook page using the correct address in the src attribute. 
    
    ![](Pictures/10000000000001CB000000BD6C492DD7.jpg)

*Don't come back until you've tried it yourself\!* Have you tried it?

I tried it but my pictures won't load I just got the alternate text\! 

That's okay sometimes working with folders and files can get you
confused go through and check to make sure you got the directions right,
and worse case you can just use the entire path like I said earlier. 

Oh man it was so dumb I forgot to make the image folder, then I told the
computer to look in an image folder that wasn't there\! 

That's not dumb it's a typical mistake starting out. Sometimes people
will make the image folder, but forget to put the image in it, sometimes
they'll forget to use only lowercase names for their files, or type the
name wrong in their code or use the wrong file type like .jpg instead of
.png lots of ways to get a bug in your code. 

Hold on, a bug? This is a computer, not a picnic\! 

Oh, that's just what coders call mistakes in their code, “bugs\!” It
goes back to one of the first computers and there really was a yucky
moth in the computer making the program not work\!

Okay, well I fixed the bug. But one of my pictures is huge, like way
bigger than the website... so how do I make it the right size?

I see you'd like to style your images? 

Yeah style\! That sounds good\! My website is a bit plain, I'd also like
to change some things, add some color\! Give it style\!

Your website is looking a little skeletal, after all it's only html, the
skeleton of your website, to add some skin you'll need some css\! 

What is css? You say css like you say html... is it another coding
language?

Yes it is... css stands for cascading style sheets. It's a style
language that is used to style html. To get started with we can use
little bits of it as attributes in html tags. 

An attribute like src or alt? So how would I tell my image to resize
using a css style attribute?

How do you think? Look back at how the other attributes were written and
take a minute to think of how it might work before I tell you. 

# Step 6 – Style is for everyone\! So classy. 

Well I've thought about it, can we resize my images now?

You're just waiting for me to tell you the answer, come on you're
smarter than that. It's okay if you don't get it right.

Okay, okay an attribute for style... how about this:

sty=”height=20 weight = 20”

Good\! You noticed that there was an equal sign with the other
attributes, and “quotation” marks around the information in the
attributes. You're on the right track. 

So I got it right?

Almost. It makes sense that you guessed that it was shortened because
the other attributes were, but it this case they used the whole word
like this:

style=”width:500px; height:600px;”

Okay I get the style bit, the equal sign, and the quote marks... but
what's the other stuff?

It's css, cascading style sheets... that style language stuff we were
talking about. 

Okay... css language... so the width and the height is how big my
picture is, but what's those weird comma dot things ; ?

Ah these ; are called semi-colons and css uses them like periods... in
fact a lot of coding languages use them like periods. 

So the semi-colons say when one piece of css ends and another one
starts? 

Exactly, and if you leave them out it won't work\!

Okay so with my image tag... I can change the size like this:

\<img style= ”width:500px; height:600px;” src=”images/picture.jpg”
alt=”picture”\>

Exactly, that would make your image 500 pixels wide and 600 pixels
tall\! 

What's a pixel?

Good question\! In css a pixel is a measuring unit based of the size of
a dot on your screen, there are other measuring units you can use in css
like percent: % But we'll start with px for pixels.

How do I know how many pixels to make my picture?

Well a good way to learn is to experiment, but some simple advice is
remember that your picture is probably a rectangle and if you make it a
square you'll warp it\!

Like a time warp?

No... warped like stretched or squished. A large rectangular image on a
computer screen would be “width: 1024px; height: 768px;”

That seems complicated... what if I just wanted my picture to be half as
wide as the screen?

Now you know why there are different units of measurement\! To make an
image half the size of the screen just use percents % like this
“width:50%; height:50%;”

That seems easier. Can I try now?

Yes, run along and give it a go. Try both ways px and %\! See if you can
warp your pictures, come back when you're happy with the sizes. 

I'm back\! You should have seen what my face looked like squished it was
so funny\! 

So you're happy with your pictures now?

My pictures are all perfectly sized now\! But is there anything else fun
I can do with them? 

Oh tons, so many things I couldn't possibly tell you all of them\! Lots
of little css tricks we can tuck into the css attribute.

Oh, yes please\! Tell me all the tricks\!

Well I can't tell you all the tricks that would take too long, maybe
just a few. Let's start with changing the shape of our images... make
them into circles or ovals. 

Okay if it's a style css thing it would be like shape:oval; right\!?

Close but a little more boring, like this: border-radius: 80%; Just add
it in right after height\! 

Okay, so if an oval is 80% a circle must be... 50% right\!

Only if it's a square... border-radius rounds the edges, so anything
from 0% not-rounded to 100% completely-rounded works\!

What other tricks have you got\!

Here's a fun one, do you want to make your image like a ghost or a
memory? Try this: opacity:0.2; 

Those are called decimals right?

Exactly\! You can have a number from 0.0 to 1.0 a lower number like 0.2
is more transparent and 1.0 is not transparent at all.

Wow\! That is so cool\! Oval pictures and ghost pictures\! What else can
I do?

There's so many cool things you can do with pictures\! Last one for
today, have you heard about filters? 

Oh yeah\! That's when Mom puts doggy ears on my picture on her phone\!
Can we do that?

That's a very complicated filter, I'm talking about simpler ones like
making your picture gray, or changing the colors.

So I can make my picture all green or purple?

Yes or gray. Those are two filters that the css filter property will
adjust. I'm just going to tell you two filters you can use but you're
welcome to look up the rest online. 

So it's like filter: my-filter;? That's how the other css bits look.

Exactly except you need to have brackets( ) because they are “functions”
a sort of machine that needs to be set. 

So filter:my-filter( ); What do I put in the brackets to set them?

It depends on the filter you're using. If you were using grayscale you'd
put a percent in, like this: filter: grayscale(100%); that would make it
all gray\!

What about color? Gray is a bit boring\! 

Sure, to adjust the color it's: hue-rotate(180deg) That would flip the
colors to the other side of the color chart\! You can go from 0deg to
360deg.

So I add all that right after my other bits of css in the style
attribute? Can I add multiple filters?

Yes right in your style attribute, remember a semi-colon after each css
property. As for multiple filters you can just leave a space between the
filters like this: 

filter: grayscale(10%) hue-rotate(180deg);

This is fun, how many filters are there?

More than ten, but for now two is good enough are you ready for a
challenge?

Yeah\! I want to style my images with some more css\!

Lets get styling\! *Step \#6 in building your website:*

  -   - Open your html file.
      - Add the style=”” attribute to your \<img\> tag.
      - Add the css height: and width: css properties.
      - Experiment with px and % 
      - Don't forget the ; after each css property. 
      - Experiment with border-radius using %
      - Experiment with opacity using decimals from 0.0 to 1.0 fix
        example
      - Try css filter: 
      - Use the filter attributes: grayscale(%) and hue-rotate(deg)
      - Don't forget semi-colons ;

![](Pictures/10000000000002EF00000111F37A155C.jpg)

  - 
*Don't come back until you've tried it yourself\!* Have you tried it?

Wow this css stuff makes my pictures look amazing\! But what if I had a
lot of pictures and I wanted all their style attributes to be the same,
do I have to type out all the css each time?

Nope only beginners put the css right inside the html like we're doing
using the style attribute... it gets messy really fast if we fill up our
html with css. 

So where do we put it then?

Think about it for a minute, we've got html code, images and now css
code. Where do you think we should put it?

# Step 7 – Our css gets it's own home. Text gets exciting\!

I'd put it somewhere in my website folder, in a file maybe?

Exactly, we have an html file, so we can have a css file too. Sometimes
on big websites we even have a css folder like our image folder. A text
file ends with .txt and our html file ends with .html what do you think
the css file will end with? 

That's easy\! .css Right?

Exactly\! So let's start by moving our entire style=”” attributes and
all their properties to a new notepad document and save it as
style.css\! 

I have 3 images with 3 different styles should I copy all three? 

Sure we can straighten it all out once it's in the file\!

Do we use little arrows to wrap our styles in the css file like we do in
html?

Nope, but we do wrap our css styles we just use curly braces: { } On
your keyboard find the curly braces and hold down the shift key when you
press the { key.

Curly braces look pretty like curly hair. If css is for making my
website pretty is that why we use pretty wrapping?

I doubt that was the original intention, but that is a good way to
remember to use curly braces: { }

So I just go wrap each style attribute in curly braces in my style.css
file?

Yes, but you get rid of the style= and the quote marks “ ” you don't
need them in a css file. 

I don't understand how the html knows which css style attribute goes
with which html image tag?

If you had three gifts for three different people and the wrapping all
looked the same how would you know which present was for which person?

I'd write their names on them\! Can I write names on my image tags? 

Yes, you can\! Coders call that an id. We can put an id in our html tag
and then use that id in our css to match the style to the image it goes
with.

What do the ids look like?

Well you need to put your id in two places: in the myWebsite.html file
and in your style.css file and each one is a little different. 

How about we start with the html id? 

Okay that goes inside your tag and is written as an attribute id=” ” and
you put your image's name inside the quote marks. 

So if my picture is of me I could just put id=”me” inside my image tag?

Exactly and then inside your style.css file you'd put \#me at the front
of the styles for that image, but outside the curly braces. The hash \#
key is on the 3 key you need to hold down shift.

So my picture of my dog would be id=”dog” in the html \<img\> tag and
\#dog inside my style.css folder.

You've got it\! 

I fixed my the style for the picture of me\! The html is like this:

\<img id=”me” src="images/me.jpg" alt="A picture of me\!"\>

and the css is like this:

\#me{width:25%; height:25%; border-radius: 50%; opacity:80%; filter:
grayscale(5%) hue-rotate(300deg);}

That's pretty good, but we're trying to make things more tidy and less
messy so let me show you a better way to format it. Try putting your css
like this:

\#me {

width:25%; 

height:25%; 

border-radius: 50%; 

opacity:80%; 

filter: grayscale(5%) hue-rotate(300deg);

}

You put each css property on it's own line. That makes it easier to
read.

It makes it easier to read and easier to change things in the future.

Wait a second\! We had to tell the html where to find the image with our
source src=”” attribute we don't have any src attribute telling the html
how to find our css file\! 

Yes that is an important detail, that goes in the head tag.

You never told me about a head tag\! What is a head tag? It sounds
important\!

Now no need to lose your head over this, but I also didn't tell you
about the html tag or the body tag.

What\! I thought I knew all the important html tags\! Those sound really
important\! My website should have a head and a body? And I thought we
told the website that the file was html by adding the \<\!DOCTYPE html\>
tag? 

Yes it seems I've left some things out. You see, because websites
include more than just html we need to break the website file up into
parts. The head includes stuff just for the computer called metadata.
It's invisible in the browser. 

So that's where I put my src=”” for my style.css file?

Yes, and the body is where you put all the html that you want everyone
to see, and you wrap the head and the body together inside an html tag.
Like this:

\<\!DOCTYPE html\>

\<html\>

\<head\>

\<link rel=”stylesheet” type=”text/css” href=”style.css”\>

\</head\>

\<body\>

\<img id=”me” src="images/me.jpg" alt="A picture of me\!"\>

\</body\>

\</html\>

Wait\! Why are you using href instead of src? Source is src\! 

Bright kid\! When we use src we're telling the html to put the whole
source file inside the tag, but with href (HypertextREFrence) we're
telling the html to link to the file. We use src for images and href for
css stylesheets.

So I have to go back and add html, head and body tags to my website.html
file or else my css won't work anymore?

Don't forget the \<link\> tag you need it with the three attributes rel,
type and href. 

So I get that href stands for HypertextREFrence, but what are rel and
type for?

Those are simple, rel stands for relationship and if you're linking to
your css file that is a “stylesheet”, and type says the content of the
linked file and that is “text/css”.

So now that I have this cool stylesheet css file, can I style anything
else other than images. Can I just drop id=”” attributes in all my tags?

You sure can, but it would get old fast to drop an id into every \<p\>
tag if you just wanted them all to be purple. 

Purple\! Cool\! How do I do it then if I don't put id's in every tag?

There's 3 types of 'selectors' you can use in your css: element, id and
class. 

So I know that id is html: id=”me” and css: \#me, what are element and
class?

An element is just the name of the tag you want to change and it is
applied to every tag of that type. So if you want to change all the
\<p\> tags to purple in your css file you'd do this:

p {

color: purple;

}

and with class in the html you'd put class=”purple” and in the css
instead of \# you'd use .purple. Id is for one tag, class is for more
than one tag. 

Awesome\! So what about the background? I have to have a cool background
if I'm going to have purple words\!

Sure backgrounds can be changed with css, just use the element selector
for the body and you can use either the background-color or
background-image property in your curly braces. 

body {

background-color: lightblue;

background-image: url(images/me.jpg);

background-size: auto;

}

Ready for a challenge?

Yeah\! Bring it on\!

Stylesheet madness\! *Step \#7 in building your website:*

  -   - Open your html file.
      - Add the \<html\>\<head\>\</head\>\<body\>\</body\>\</html\>
        tags.
      - Add \<link rel=”stylesheet” type=”text/css” href=”style.css”\>
        to the header.
      - Move your style=”” attributes to a new notepad document. Copy
        and paste.
      - Save as style.css
      - Get rid of style=”” bits of the code. Don't forget to get rid of
        the “” marks too\!
      - Wrap each of your css styles in curly braces { }
      - Add id=”yourId” attributes to each of your \<img\> tags in your
        html file.
      - In your css file put \#yourId selector outside and in-front of
        the your css styles.
      - Format the css nicely putting each property on it's own line.
      - Use css to change the color of your \<p\> tags using the element
        selector p. 
      - Link to pick colors:
        <https://www.rapidtables.com/web/css/css-color.html> 
      - Use css to change the background of your \<body\> tag using
        backgound-color: color;
      - Try changing the color of other tags to see what happens.
      - If you're looking for free images for your background try
        pixabay.com 

![](Pictures/1000000000000428000002AF00D86493.jpg) 

I did almost all of that as you were explaining it, so I'm done
already\!

Well sometimes it is easier to take little bites out of a puzzle rather
than to try to do it all at once... if you found it easy here's one more
bonus challenge:

Add descriptions of your friends after each name and then use the
class=”” attribute to change the color of the \<p\>'s with the
descriptions inside, remember with the class selector we use a . instead
of a \# in the css. 

That was fun\! But it took me a long time to write all the
descriptions\! 

You must be tired after all that work\! How about we take a break for
now?

Alright but next I want to move my friends and family list so they're
right beside each other instead of underneath. And my name is starting
to look less impressive I want a big banner with my name on top of a
picture\!

Well you think about what you'd like to move around on your site and in
a bit I'll tell you about a tag that acts like a block.

# Step 8 – Moving blocks around and making banners.

\- To be continued. 

# Tips for when stuck:

  - Keyboard shortcut: Hold down the 'Ctrl' and 'c' keys together to
    copy and 'Ctrl' and 'v' keys to paste. 
  - If you're having trouble reading your code add some spaces between
    the tags, html ignores extra spaces outside the tags. 
  - Ask for help. Sometimes a little help can go a long way. 
  - Review what you've already learned.
  - To open a html document in notepad don't just click on it, right
    click and chose “open with” notepad.

(Good time to talk about comments html/css)

Future chapters contents:

  - divs and moving things around. Paddding/margin \<hr\>
  - header and footer. I want a big banner across the top of my page\!
  - links to my favorite sites/open in new tab/images as links/links to
    spots on page
  - Adding other pages. Time to teach nav (bootstrap makes things nice
    easily)
  - Putting it online\! Github pages.
